# APIC Precision Microbenchmarks

This directory contains the experiments to determine the accuracy of timer
interrupts sent through the local APIC, as described in Appendix A of the
[AEX-Notify paper](https://jovanbulck.github.io/files/usenix23-aexnotify.pdf).
See [../apic-ipi](../apic-ipi) for complementary microbenchmarks that assess
the accuracy of APIC inter-processor interrupts.

The local APIC timer can be configured in one-shot or periodic mode to send an
interrupt when an MMIO counter register reaches zero, or in TSC-deadline mode
when the processor's timestamp counter exceeds a value specified in the
dedicated `IA32_TSC_DEADLINE_MSR` model-specific register.  Depending on the
processor model, the APIC timer operates at the frequency of either the
processorâ€™s bus clock or its core crystal clock. Neither time source is
synchronized with the core clock, which typically operates at a much higher
frequency (e.g., more than 100x higher).

**TSC-Deadline Mode.** As a contribution of independent interest, we devised an
improved setup to considerably reduce the noise from additional kernel context
switches. For this, we registered a custom ring-0 interrupt gate in the
processor's interrupt-descriptor table. This allows to essentially bypass the
OS kernel altogether by directly invoking a minimal assembly handler that
programs a specified value in `IA32_TSC_DEADLINE_MSR` using the privileged
`WRMSR` instruction via a software interrupt. 

**Comparison Results.** We conclude that our novel interrupt-gate TSC-deadline
timer configuration technique yields a considerable improvement in terms of
standard deviation of elapsed cycles for both the existing one-shot technique
that SGX-Step currently uses, as well as naive kernel-level configuration
approaches (cf. as is also visually evident in the figure below)

![APIC distribution histogram](apic-hist.png)
